welcome to topcast and to episode
165. this is part five on my discussion
of Papa's lecture on the sources of
knowledge and of ignorance which is
basically about how we know and how it
is we make mistakes especially in light
of everyone else's misconceived ideas
about how this happens especially today
and when I say especially today the
people especially today who talk about
how it is that we know or we learn and
how it is that we end up making mistakes
especially if they try and take
seriously this notion of how it is that
we come to knowledge and yet also
simultaneously end up making errors
along the way when they take it
seriously they go wrong because they
think that we're able to get to certain
knowledge if we're able to get the
certain knowledge how on Earth do we go
about making mistakes along the way
anyone who's not a papirium or comes
from that sort of stance seems to think
that our mind is infected in some way
with Unholy Demons of A Sort okay so
they don't necessarily call it Unholy
demons but they might think that we've
got some genetic predisposition towards
certain wrong ideas or that we're not
paying sufficient attention proper has a
different way of looking at these things
and he's taking historical view here of
where our present modern understandings
of these things are coming from
especially his perspective the
perspective he is providing the idea
that we are conjecturing guessing our
way to better and better knowledge and
along the way criticizing our ideas in
order to refine the ideas we do have
into something the more accurately
represents what reality is like or at
least by our own lights is a better
explanation of what's going on in the
world he's already talked about the
empiricists in the British tradition and
the rationalists in the Continental
European tradition and he's saying that
both of these schools of philosophy have
great virtue in them they were a relief
from Authority the relief from deferring
to either the holy book is having all of
the knowledge or as the priest or the
prophet or the Emperor or the king being
able to by decree say what the truth of
the matter happened to be in both cases
they were arguing for a more individual
way of constructing knowledge saying
that individual people could rely upon
their senses and their minds in order to
sift a little bit of truth from all of
the misconception that was out there now
they happen to think that you could
really get to some sort of final truth
that was an error okay and that was an
appeal to a kind of authority of the
senses and reason so we're going to get
more into that today and to see what
Papa has to say about these historic
views of knowledge and he's getting to
what the more correct view of knowledge
is now this is part 11 of the lecture
and in part 11 papa says quote bacon and
Descartes set up observation and reason
as new authorities and they set them up
within each individual man but in in
doing so they split man into two parts
into a higher part which had Authority
with respect to truth Bacon's
observations Descartes intellect and the
lower part it is this lower part which
constitutes our ordinary cells the old
Adam in us for it is always we ourselves
who are alone responsible for error if
truth is Manifest it is we with our
prejudices our negligence our
pig-headedness who are to blame it is we
ourselves who are the sources of our
ignorance okay end quote there what's
Papa saying well he's saying there that
bacon and Descartes believed in this
idea of having observations and
intellect respectively bacon was an
empiricist Descartes was a rationalist
and they're both representing here
schools of thought from their respective
cultures their respective traditions in
philosophy okay bacon from the British
tradition Descartes from the Continental
European tradition they're both saying
that these are authoritative sources of
of knowledge so we need somewhere to put
the blames so to speak for where the
errors come from and what they're saying
is that well it's the human being the
human being's mind makes errors which I
would agree with however they're setting
up authorities they're saying that the
nonetheless is this Divine Authority
this perfect pristine way of getting at
the certain truth which is wrong which
is incorrect there is no such Source all
of them all of these ways of getting
channels of information which we can
decode in some way to find out something
about the structure of Reality by
constructing knowledge all of them are
error-prone the way in which our senses
work is error prone itself okay I've
talked about this before and I won't go
over it again but the way in which the
light we receive from for example the
sun reflecting off the leaves of trees
is interpreted by our minds and that
chain of causation which allows us to
think we are perceiving a particular
thing is itself prone to going wrong as
is our reason
even if applied in the most rigorous
manner by carefully thinking and so on
and so forth can lead us astray things
can go wrong it is not perfect it itself
is a form of knowledge which is fallible
it's conjectural everything at every
single point is fallible is airplane the
only thing that does not contain errors
is reality itself which our mind is
Conjuring a virtual reality rendering of
we do not directly perceive reality okay
reality is out there without its
contradictions reality is out there
perfect in a sense in a sense it is the
thing that we construct our imperfect
knowledge of imperfect knowledge of what
of everything else that exists in
physical reality and even abstract
reality but what pop is trying to say
here is it's not all our fault we're
putting in the greatest effort we can at
times through science and history in
every other way in which we want to
objective knowledge about the world but
even if we were putting our effort in to
the absolute limits of what a human is
capable of that will not eliminate the
errors because there is no perfect
source of Truth there is no way of
Simply extracting Knowledge from reality
we have to bring our ideas to reality we
create knowledge in our minds of the
external reality we're not deriving it
from external reality
which is why it doesn't matter if
external reality contains no errors in
some sense we can't extract that perfect
Knowledge from that reality because the
only way of us being able to interface
so to speak with reality is via these
channels of information
both our sensors and the deployment of
our reason which are both subject to
error let's keep going popper goes on to
say quote thus we are split into a human
part we ourselves the part which is the
source of our fallible opinions doxa of
our errors and of our ignorance and a
superhuman part such as the senses or
the intellect the part which is the
source of real knowledge episteme and
which has an almost Divine authority
over us but this will not do
for we know that Descartes physics
admirable as it was in many ways was
mistaken yet it was based only upon
ideas which he thought were clear and
distinct and which therefore should have
been true
and that the senses were not reliable
either and thus had no Authority was
well known to the ancients for example
to heraclitus and Parmenides and
Democritus and Plato though hardly known
to epicurus it is strange that this
teaching of antiquity could almost be
ignored by modern empiricists including
phenomenalists and positivists yet it is
ignored by most of the problems posed by
positivists and phenomenalists and in
the solutions they offer the reason is
this
they still believe that it is not our
senses that are but it is always we
ourselves who ER in our interpretation
of what is given to us by our senses our
senses tell the truth but we may ER for
example when we try to put into language
conventional man-made imperfect language
what they tell us it is our linguistic
description which is faulty because it
may be tinged with prejudice end quote
so there's much to comment on there but
I'll just leave it at one particular
thing that might be hanging over us more
obviously than rest where papa says of
the positivists and the phenomenalists
they think that our senses tell the
truth in what sense do our senses tell
the truth what does this even mean when
we look at I don't know any Star and we
see that it's white or our senses
telling us the truth is the star really
white what does that mean
what is white what is light how on Earth
can our senses be delivering us perfect
information of what a star is when in
fact the light looked at closely enough
using special instrumentation which is
an addition to our senses and perhaps
even requires technology like computers
in order to break up into the different
wavelengths will be revealed that there
is no such thing strictly speaking as
white light there is no wavelength
corresponding to White it is the
combination of all the different
wavelengths of light that constitute a
rainbow put those together red orange
yellow green blue indigo violet and then
you'll get white and even then that's
misleading because there is no discrete
red light there's a whole bunch of
wavelengths which would count as red by
the way and so we can divide up that
Spectrum all the way from red in the
visible through to Violet indivisible
into literally thousands of different
discrete wavelengths of light possibly
more than that but you won't get that
from your senses however carefully you
apply your senses your senses cannot
provide you with that information the
human eye is simply incapable of being
able to see white light as the rainbow
except under certain circumstances like
specifically a rainbow but even then
you're not really getting the truth of
the matter about what light consists of
and that's just lights never mind it
reflecting off put certain things this
is the very substance so to speak
speaking of light as a substance that
allows us to observe most everything
else with our eyes we can only see other
stuff when the light reflects off it but
light itself the very thing that is
allowing us to see is itself a complex
entity out there in the world that needs
to be understood before you really know
what's going on when you see the green
leaves when you see the Blue Sky when
you see the brown koalas fur all of that
saying that saying that anything has a
particular color depends upon some
deeper understanding of lot truth be
told if we want to talk about what color
things are from a scientific perspective
so it simply isn't the case that our
sensors tell the truth it's wrong it's
misconceived our senses are channels of
information which need to be interpreted
and by the way the channel of
information itself can be filled with
error can be incomplete cannot convey
the truth of the matter like I just said
with the star what color is a star
is it really white well it appears to be
white but what does it mean to say that
something is white like a star it's not
that simple a star might very well be
better described as all the colors of
the rainbow which when combined and
interpreted by a human eye
appears to be white but appearing is not
the same as being these are different
things and I'm not merely splitting
hairs this applies to anything of
interest in science
and anything of interest to people just
broadly speaking there is so much that
is hidden from our eyes all together and
hidden from our senses all together no
careful use of the senses in telling us
the truth when we look at the sky will
ever give us the information that there
exists these things called pulsars or
black holes or galaxies more distant
than the Andromeda galaxy because none
of those things can be seen with the
senses we need something else or in a
more mundane way if our senses are
telling us the truth what does tinnitus
tell us tinnitus is this condition that
some people have almost everyone has
from time to time of the ringing in the
ears well okay the senses are telling us
about a sound that isn't actually there
this is something to do with the sillier
inside your ears bent over for some
reason and vibrating or it could be
something like just a misfiring of
what's going on in the mind so you're
getting this sensation something from
the center
that doesn't exist so the senses are not
telling us the truth at all they're
giving us information which need to be
interpreted and sometimes on reflection
of that interpretation we realize it's a
complete and utter error and we can
discount what the sentence is saying the
senses are misleading us and in fact
that's a better way to describe what's
going on look the senses are misleading
channels of information and we somehow
rather need to correct the errors in the
misconceptions that the senses would
otherwise lead us to in order that we
get something better in terms of more
reliable knowledge about the world the
senses alone won't do it what popper has
also said there is that well then there
were attempts by philosophers to say
that well if the senses are telling us
the truth where things are going wrong
is us trying to say in words to put into
language what the senses are telling us
and when we do that that process of
putting things into words uh that's what
goes wrong and as Papa goes on to say
quote
so our man-made language was at fault
but then it was discovered that our
language too was given to us in an
important sense that it embodied the
wisdom and experience of many
generations and that it should not be
blamed if we misused it so language two
became a truthful Authority that could
never deceive us if we fall into
temptation and use language in vain then
it is we who are to blame for the
trouble that ensues for language as a
jealous God and will not hold him
Guiltless that taketh his words in vain
but will throw him into darkness and
confusion end quote so popper is making
a a deal of language here and for one
reason is that he is responding to his
peers at this time the time of writing
this the time of delivering this lecture
he was swimming amongst other
philosophers who were very focused on
linguistic analysis and have ever since
by the way have been ever since this is
the wittgenstinian school of a form of
logical positivism that reduced all
problems in philosophy to Simply puzzles
of language and so he's saying there
that those linguistic philosophers
they're saying well you know language is
pristine it can perfectly well capture
what we mean by our statements in
reality so again the only possible
source of error is in US misinterpreting
what the language is actually about you
have to get to the final definitions of
things and properly understanding those
final definitions will give you the
truth okay so again it's only your fault
okay it's all to do with the fallible
human being so they had something right
there okay they did have this idea that
people made errors what they got wrong
was that there were infallible sources
of knowledge and of course this also
leads to the idea that mistakes might
not be made by the right kind of person
if you're the right kind of person with
the right philosophical training let's
say then you understand what language is
all about you understand what the words
really mean you understand that the
sensors are not going to deceive us and
are going to give us the truth you are
the conduit to truth
you are the authority on wisdom and
knowledge
something that popper of course
disagrees with entirely and it's
interesting that philosophers tend to
converge in that direction it's
frightening at times they speak as if
well you need this class of people who
are going to interpret reality for you
the philosopher king who was going to be
the authority the authoritative Source
themselves on understanding language
understanding reality and being able to
tell you what the truth is because
they're not subject to error in the same
way as the rest of you don't you get it
they're the educated people and they're
the people who are able to see reality
as it is and in and get to the truth of
the matter okay so they might not talk
in exactly that way but it underpins the
philosophy they have in a sense it's
self-serving it might not be consciously
self-serving
uh but it's at least there implicit in
their ideas and the way in which they've
constructed their philosophy Papa goes
on quote by blaming us and our language
or misuse of language it is possible to
uphold the Divine authority of the
census and even of language
but it is possible only at the cost of
widening the gap between this Authority
and ourselves between the pure sources
from which we can obtain an
authoritative knowledge of the truthful
goddess nature and our impure guilty
selves between God and man as indicated
before this idea of truthfulness of
nature which I believe can be discerned
in bacon derives from the Greeks for it
is part of the classical opposition
between nature and human convention
which according to Plato is due to
pindar which may be discerned in
parmanidis and which is identified by
him and by some sophists for example by
hippius and partly also by Plato himself
with the opposition between Divine truth
and human error or even falsehood after
bacon and under his influence the idea
that nature is divine and truthful and
that all era or falsehood is due to the
deceitfulness of our own human
conventions continue to play a major
role not only in the history of
philosophy of Science and of politics
but also in that of the visual arts this
may be seen for example from constables
most interesting theories on nature
veracity Prejudice and Convention quoted
in E H gombridge art and illusion it has
also played a role in the history of
literature and even in that of Music end
quote and that's the end of part 11
we're on to part 12. but before we go to
Part 12 let's just linger over that
section there that popper has talked
about on the artist Constable John
Constable who is a British Artist visual
artist and he had some theories on as
papa says there nature veracity
prejudicing invention quoted in e h
gomrich's book art and illusion which is
well out of copyright and so I was able
to get a PDF of that particular book and
go to the section where Constable
actually talks about this stuff to see
what the big deal is that Papa was
making of this it seems to me there that
perhaps this eh gombridge and popper
might have been friends I don't know I
haven't gotten into the details of their
relationship but I say that because gone
Bridge quotes Papa part way through the
book and so let me just read what uh
this fellow e h gon Bridge who was an
Austrian art historian now this is a
really really a turn up for the books
when it comes to topcast I often don't
talk about art because it's well outside
my area of expertise so to speak so I'm
uncomfortable swimming in these Waters
but I'm happy to go to the sources that
popper their quotes and to say what they
have to say and as I say this eh gone
bridge this art historian quotes Papa
rather interesting and what he says this
is I'm reading from page 282 of that
book that popper has mentioned their art
and illusion and gombridge writes quote
this inductivist ideal of pure
observation has proved a mirage in
science no less than in art the very
idea that it should be possible to
observe without expectation that you can
make your mind an innocent blank on
which nature will record its Secrets has
come in for strong criticism every
observation as Carl Poppa has stressed
is a result of a question we ask nature
and every question implies a tentative
hypothesis we look for something because
our hypothesis makes us expect certain
results let us see if they follow if not
we must revise our hypothesis and try
again to test it against observation as
rigorously as we can we do that by
trying to disprove it and the hypothesis
that survives that winnowing process is
the one we feel entitled to hold
pro-tempore end quote well this is
refreshing
this is refreshing from someone outside
of philosophy outside of Science in the
area of the Arts
this is brilliant now there's a whole
section there prior to this by the way
where he talks about induction and he
goes on further to talk more about the
philosophy but that will distract me
from my reading of Papa's actual worker
today but just to say well there appears
to have been a school that existed at
some point where the artists were very
much in a deep philosophical tradition
of rationalism
rather than what we see today what we
see today is of course relativist
Notions this undermining of what is
beautiful and what is good and what is
rational and what is reasonable and so
on and so forth turning art into a
political movement of some kind but this
has not always been the case indeed
there appears to have been certainly art
historians who are deeply familiar with
critical rationalism that's phenomenal
that's a really interesting part of
History I would say but as I say I'm not
expert in the field no doubt there are
artists listening to this perhaps who
might very well think oh no there are
people today there are academics and
intellectuals today heavily engaged in
the artistic world who are familiar with
Pogba who do rely upon rationalist means
of trying to make better art and to
understand the art that's gone before
from a more rational perspective rather
than looking at it through a political
lens let's say what does this John
Constable go on to say about nature of
veracity Prejudice convention which
popper was so in impressed by In This
Book well let's have a look for that
throughout the book gombridge is
speaking of constable John Constable the
artist the the painter as engaging in
scientific experiments that that's what
Constable talked about when he was
talking about painting he was saying
that what he was doing was akin to a
scientific experiment in other words
trying to come to some deeper
understanding of reality out there he's
trying to test the painting against
reality it doesn't mean that he's trying
to get to a perfect representation
indeed he says later on being quoted
that he can't actually do this he can
only kind of get more source of reality
in a way by painting some scene some
landscape then he can tell you something
of the truth about what's going on there
without ever being able to capture the
whole truth so this is a very
interesting papyrian way of looking at
something like Visual Arts Constable
appears to be drawing parallels between
what a scientist is doing and what an
artist is doing an artist like himself
is doing he's basically saying that well
the scientist has to choose what to
observe what to experiment on what to
explain what part of reality you can't
take the whole thing all at once you
have to narrow down and focus on a
specific thing and then the science will
tell you about that specific thing so
too with the artists you can't just
paint a landscape that's not really what
you're doing Constable is saying you can
concentrate on particular things and try
and bring them into Stark relief so to
speak either you're going to concentrate
on the light and or Shadow you're going
to concentrate on the color but you're
going to represent something it's
generally not photorealism that you're
striving for although some artists do in
fact do that of course but then you may
as well just have the photo and
comfortable in the book he's been quoted
as reflecting on why he should focus on
one thing rather than another having
admitted the necessity of focusing on
one thing rather than another why why
focus on one thing rather than another
like why is it that Constable chooses to
paint the kind of paintings that he does
he paints particular kinds of Landscapes
or what he says is quote
the sound of water escaping from Mill
dams Etc Willows old rotten planks slimy
posts and brickwork I love such things I
shall never cease to paint such places
painting is with me but another word for
feeling and I associate my careless
Boyhood with all that lies on the banks
of the stower
these scenes make me a painter end quote
so he's saying it's just his preference
that is driving him to paint particular
things and other people have different
preferences other artists paint
different things in the same way that
scientists are drawn towards particular
problems and they're going to tell you
about the solutions they've found to
those particular problems but it never
gives you all of reality it doesn't
solve the question of what is reality
what is the final ultimate answer to
this question because any final ultimate
answer is going to draw in content from
other areas beyond the narrowly focused
area that or problem that one was
initially focused upon what gombridge
says later on about Constable is that
quote the truth Constable was after he
has often explained quote lights Jews
breezes blooms and freshness not one of
which has yet been perfected by any
painter in the world end quote he'd it
was for their sake that he looked upon
other men's paintings as things to be
avoided for their sake that he looked
upon his own as experiments end quote so
what's he saying there well he's saying
Constable was really interested in those
things lights Jews breezes blooms and
freshness he was trying to capture those
in his paintings in some way to
represent that to try and evoke those
particular things in his paintings he
had to pick something to focus on he
focused on those and he was never going
to get there perfectly rather he was
perfecting striving for an Ever better
more accurate representation of those
things and in the same way this is what
science does and what the scientist does
to get to an Ever better closer
representation of reality without
getting to reality itself just a
representation of a model of of course
we would say there's a difference here
between Art and Science one is doing the
explaining
one is producing an image these are not
precisely the same thing one has a cause
and effect relationship implied in the
explanation in some way shape or form an
account of what is going on and why
whereas the art might not tell you why
what is represented in the image appears
to be exactly that way it's just saying
here is the thing without saying why it
would appear that way okay so that's
Constable being quoted in ah has gone
britches art and illusion a little left
field turn for the top cast right there
we're going to go on to Part 12 now of
on the sources of knowledge and of
ignorance and papa goes on to say quote
can the strange view that the truth of a
statement may be decided upon by
inquiring into its sources that is to
say its origin be explained is due to
some logical mistake which might be
cleared up or can we do no better than
explain it in terms of religious beliefs
or in psychological terms referring
perhaps to parental Authority I believe
that it is indeed possible to discern
here a logical mistake which is
connected with the close analogy between
the meaning of our words or terms or
concepts and the truth of our statements
or propositions end quote I think pop is
being a little bit loose here it'd be
interesting to be able to interrogate
him on that point
he said the truth of our statements or
propositions as if they're
interchangeable but as David Deutsch has
observed we cannot utter propositions a
proposition is a feature of logic it's a
logical thing represented usually by a
variable you know the proposition P but
we can't actually say what p is just a p
represents some abstract proposition
with a definite truth value a
proposition can be true or false or
perhaps undecidable but anyway it has a
specific truth value whether or not we
can know it or not statements are the
things that we say we say the leaves are
green there's a statement but it
precisely speaking doesn't have a truth
value it has an approx it's an
approximation to a proposition which
does have a truth value truth and
falsity are properties of propositions
that's the domain of logic and
Mathematics and we can talk in the
abstract about the truth and falsity of
these particular things but when it
comes to making statements about the
real world what we have are
approximations which are not identically
true or identically false we have an
explanation that either a thing is the
case or a thing is not the case but we
can't get to the final truth of
something or other okay so statements
properly considered are approximations
to propositions and these two terms if
we're doing careful philosophy should
not be easily interchanged that quibble
aside let's get going Papa goes on to
say quote it is easy to see that the
meaning of our words does have some
connection with their history or their
origin a word is logically considered a
conventional sign psychologically
considered it is a sign whose meaning is
established by usage or customer
Association logically considered its
meaning is indeed established by an
initial decision something like a
primary definition or convention a kind
of original social contract and
psychologically considered its meaning
was established when we originally
learned to use it logically considered
its meaning is indeed established by an
initial decision something like a
primary definition or convention a kind
of original social contract and
psychologically considered its meaning
was established when we originally
learned to use it when we first formed
our linguistic habits and associations
thus there is a point in the complaint
of the Schoolboy about the unnecessary
artificiality of French in which pain
means bread well in English he feels it
is so much more natural and
straightforward in calling pain pain and
bread bread he may understand the
conventionality of the usage perfectly
well but he gives expression to the
feeling that there is no reason why the
original conventions original for him
should not to be binding so his mistake
May consist merely in forgetting that
there can be several equally binding
original conventions but who is not made
implicitly the same mistake most of us
have caught ourselves and a feeling of
surprise when we find that in France
even little children's speak French
fluently
of course we smile about our own naivety
but we do not smile about the policeman
who discovers that the real name of the
man called Samuel Jones was John Smith
though he is no doubt a Last Vestige of
the magical belief that we gain power
over a man or a God by gaining knowledge
of his real name end quote
I had precisely the same experience on
my first visit to Korea trying to learn
Korean terribly here in Australia for
well
months to years and making very little
progress and actually going to Korea for
the first time and I remember saying to
my partner as we're wandering around the
streets of Seoul it's absolutely
astonishing how these toddlers speak
Korean so well they're brilliant aren't
they
it is it is kind of it does take you
back when you're in a country especially
a place where you've tried so hard to
learn the language and then these little
children are wandering around speaking
it for all the world fluently and of
course they are of course they are
but it's still surprising now at this
point of course in the text of the
lecture popper is again focusing on
linguistic analysis because his
contemporaries were and so he's
responding to this other movement in
philosophy so when talking about the
sources of knowledge and of ignorance
because so many others are focused on
the fact that both knowledge and
ignorance come down in some way to our
use of language and that language this
is something called The sappier Wharf
hypothesis as well that your language
the weak version of it says well it
merely shapes the way in which you
understand the world the strong version
says it determines it determines fully
the way in which you can possibly
understand the world you are restricted
from understanding certain things by the
language you speak which I think is just
complete Nutter nonsense it's bogus that
if there's something you don't
understand well we routinely invent
words if there's a chemical out there in
reality that has only just been
discovered it's not like we can't
possibly understand that thing because
we lack a word for it no we have a way
in which to eat to represent it we
actually have conventions we have a
nomenclature system in chemistry for
inventing new words but even if we're
not talking chemistry any old concept
that we come across that's new in
reality especially on social media this
happens all the time you know the very
word meme has come to mean something
else on social media we invent new terms
scientists do it all the time and young
people of course are very good at
repurposing language and inventing new
words in order to talk about the things
that they're interested in language does
not determine what it's possible to know
full stop period can it shape the way in
which you understand reality well
insofar as anything any way in which we
communicate or sense the world shapes
the way in which we understand reality
whatever that word shape might mean but
so long as the the shaping is infinitely
elastic in some way you know open always
to revision to being improved to to
widening the window through which we can
see reality then I've got no problem
with saying that language can shape
reality but but as soon as there's a
problem with language that's preventing
Us in some way from actually talking
about reality we just invent more words
we we have a more convoluted let's say
sentence which allows us to describe
what's going on that's not a problem so
Papa goes on and he says quote thus
there is indeed a familiar as well as a
logically defensible sense in which the
true or proper meaning of a term is its
original meaning so that if we
understand it we do so because we
learned it correctly from a true
Authority from one who knew the language
this shows that the problem of the
meaning of a word is indeed linked to
the problem of the authoritative Source
or the origin of our usage and it is
different with the problem of the truth
of a statement of fact or proposition
for anybody can make a factual mistake
even in matters on which he should be an
authority such as his own age or the
color of a thing which he has just this
moment clearly and distinctly perceived
as to the origins a statement May easily
have been false when it was first made
and first properly understood a word on
the other hand must have a proper
meaning as soon as it was ever
understood if we thus reflect on the
difference between the ways in which the
meaning of words and the truth of
statements is related to their Origins
we are hardly tempted to think that the
question of origin can have much bearing
on the question of knowledge or of Truth
there is however a deep analogy between
meaning and truth and there is a
philosophical view I have called it
essentialism which tries to link meaning
and truth so closely that the temptation
to treat both in the same way becomes
almost irresistible okay end quote now
here are here I'll have a a quibble with
terminology with popper papa wants to
say there that
you are an authority so to speak You're
an authoritative Source on the things
that you know about yourself you're an
authoritative Source on let's say your
age well I think we can just do away
with this idea of authority and
authoritative sources all we need to say
the following Papa's broader
epistemology is that you know your age
okay you are the person who knows your
age you could be mistaken about it by
the way you could you're still fallible
on the I know sometimes I have to think
to myself how old am I exactly now
um you get to that age where you kind of
forget it
where you kind of forget specifically
precise of the year I know approximately
sometimes I forget exactly I don't think
I'm an authoritative Source on anything
you know you you can just say that you
know something that you have a good
explanation of the thing at least you
think you do
so I I don't think I'm willing to go
that far with Papa to say that there are
certain places where there actually are
authoritative sources on things or
whatever the case popper is now talking
about
truth and meaning and comparing these
two things
and well he goes on to say quote in
order to explain this briefly we may
first contemplate the table on page 20
noting the relationship between its two
sides end quote now this table is
something that appears in other places
in Papa's work in particular it appears
in his essay epistemology without a
knowing subject so he likes to come back
to this
and to talk about the ways in which we
can compare truth and meaning and
theories and Concepts now for audio
listeners let me try to describe what
the table is
now there's a left hand side of the
table on the right hand side of the
table that are perfectly symmetrical and
there are pairs of words the pairs of
words are Concepts and theories
words and assertions meaningful and true
meaning and Truth definitions and
derivations undefined Concepts primitive
propositions and so now I'll read the
left hand side of the table in a
coherent way having given you the pairs
of words the left hand side of the table
reads quote ideas that is designation or
terms or concepts may be formulated in
Words which may be meaningful and their
meaning may be reduced by way of
definitions to that of undefined
Concepts the attempt to establish rather
than reduce these by means of their
meaning leads to an infinite regress so
that's the left hand side talking
specifically about the philosophy that
is about words fixated on Words if
you're fixated on the meanings of words
you're eventually going to get to the
definitions of particular words which
themselves can't be further reduced
you're going to end up with undefined
Concepts you're going to lead yourself
into an infinite regress because any of
these undefined Concepts if you go about
trying to Define them it's only going to
be in terms of other words that you've
previously defined so you're not really
making any progress reducing all the
philosophy all of understanding to just
linguistic puzzles trying to understand
the true meaning of words after all your
primitive words the most basic words you
can get down to it themselves need
definition and how do you define them
well by recourse to other words which
themselves will be defined and so on and
so forth that's your infinite regress
now on the right hand side of the table
which a proper Cleaves towards more but
doesn't ultimately endorse because of
course it leads to an infinite address
as well but what it says on the the
right hand side is quote ideas that is
statements or propositions or theories
may be formulated in assertions which
may be true and their truth may be
reduced by way of derivations to that of
primitive propositions the attempt to
establish rather than Reduce by these
means their truth leads to an infinite
regress and so what he's saying there is
that we can have your theories but don't
insist your theories are true because if
you're insisting your theories are true
then you're going to end up with an
infinite regressive how you know this
particular thing is true and if all you
say is well I know this thing is true
because that thing is true that I
already established the truth of or how
did you establish the truth of that
thing well because I established the
truth this thing and so therefore you
end up with an infinite regress of
trying to establish things as true which
is a Fool's errand let's read what
popper has to say about this and he goes
on to explain it quote how are the two
sides of this table connected if we look
at the left side of the table we find
there is the word definitions but a
definition is a kind of statement or
judgment or proposition and therefore
one of those things which stand on the
right side of our table this fact
incidentally does not spoil the symmetry
of the table for derivations are also
things that transcend the kind of things
statements Etc which stand on the side
where the word derivation occurs just as
a definition is formulated by a special
kind of sequence of words rather than by
a word so a derivation is formulated by
a special kind of sequence of statements
rather than by a statement the fact that
definitions which occur on the left side
of our table are nevertheless statements
suggest that somehow they may form a
link between the left and right side of
the table that they do this is indeed
part of that philosophic Doctrine to
which I have given the name essentialism
according to essentialism especially
Aristotle's version of it a definition
is a statement of the inherent essence
or nature of thing at the same time it
states the meaning of a word of the name
that designates the essence for example
Descartes and also can't hold that the
word body designates something that is
essentially extended end quote this is
why I have difficulty and people often
come to me and they want simple
definitions of things and I have two
problems with this one a definition is
something that you're held to and then
you're told all the ways in which the
definition doesn't quite fit reality in
some way shape or form which means the
definition is not Final in their eyes
anyway and I tend to agree so rather
than have definitions people can ask for
explanations always incomplete and it
provides some level of understanding of
the concept without being definitive
which brings me to the other problem
with definitions the definition it's
almost in the word definitive it's an
end point it it prohibits kind of
further exploration of this term to
Define what an electron is is you're
saying well once and for all this is the
essence of an electron hence
essentialism but we don't want a
definition of electron we don't want to
be writing down our glossary in the back
of our school books about you know learn
off by heart what this electron is now
we want to have some understanding of it
okay so an electron is a negatively
charged particle right so you have some
understanding now of what that is but
there are other negatively charged
particles out there in the universe as
well a muon can be negatively charged so
what's the difference well an electron
is a negatively charged particle that
orbits the nucleus of many atoms okay
well so there we go we've got something
closer then but is that all that it is
well an electron happens to have
fungible instances of itself well what
does that mean okay so then we're led
into this broader and broader
understanding of things without ever
actually defining specifically what an
electron is tidying it up because that's
not what philosophy and science is about
it's not about providing definitions if
you want a definition you go to a
dictionary and even then what you're
getting is a statement which gives you a
sort of first pass approximation to the
concept behind this particular word but
the danger with definitions especially
in philosophy is that well it reduces
philosophy to just competing claims
about the meanings of Words which is a
dead end it doesn't lead to deeper
understanding it leads to quibbles over
the possible meanings of words we don't
want that we want to solve particular
problems come to a deeper understanding
by creating ever better explanations
which involve words of course it
involves words but it can repurpose
words a completely redefine
re-understand certain words and as papa
says there and I should just underline
as well the whole search for precise
definitions leads to essentialism it's
saying that well there is this Essence
we can get to at the heart of this word
representing a concept which tells you
what the thing really truly is once and
for all as if the word cat can be
defined and therefore you can have this
essence of cat this Katniss that all the
cats have and that's what the definition
gives you but that's misconceived we can
have a better and better understanding
of this entity that we call a cat over
time we can learn new things we admit
the possibility of learning new things
in this way whereas the linguistic
analysis says there comes a point where
your search for truth will come to an
end when you finally once and for all to
find the word perfectly and understood
that definition perfectly we deny that
it's possible Papa goes on to say quote
moreover Aristotle and all the other
essentialists held that definitions are
principles that is to say they yield
primitive propositions for example all
bodies are extended which cannot be
derived from other propositions and
which form the basis or a part of the
basis of every demonstration thus they
form the basis of every science see for
example my open Society especially notes
in chapter 11 which are my go-to right
now it should be noted that this
particular tenant although an important
part of the essentialist Creed is free
of any reference to Essences this
explains why it was accepted by some
nominalistic opponents of essentialism
such as Hobbes or say schlick I think we
now have the means at our disposal by
which we can explain the logic of the
view that questions of origin may decide
questions of factual Truth for if
Origins can determine the true meaning
of a term or word then they can
determine the true definition of an
important idea and they therefore some
at least of the basic principles which
are descriptions of the Essences or
Natures of things and which underlie our
demonstrations and consequently our
scientific knowledge so it will then
appear that there are authoritative
sources of our knowledge yet we must
realize that essentialism is mistaken in
suggesting that definitions can add to
our knowledge of facts although quiet
decisions about conventions they may be
influenced by our knowledge of facts and
although they create instruments which
may in their turn influence the
formation of our theories and thereby
the evolution of our knowledge of facts
once we see that definitions never give
any factual knowledge about nature or
about the nature of things we also see
the break in The Logical link between
the problem of origin and that of
factual truth which some essentialist
philosophers tried to forge end quote
and so there that's an excellent
critique of the linguistic approach to
philosophy popper is essentially saying
I said I say essentially popper is
talking about definitions as saying they
can't give us new knowledge about the
world you're just defining a particular
word but you're not actually grappling
with the nature of something the problem
that's out there in the world the cause
and effect relationship between certain
entities in science that you might want
to explain the workings of you've got
this problem merely defining a word
doesn't help you to solve that problem
to solve the problem you want an account
of what's going on and why so any
attempt to reduce this stuff to trying
to understand language is misconceived
in the trivial case we're going to point
our telescopes at the sky and see things
we can't explain
really coming up with a new word and
defining the word and saying well this
word defines I think for example Quasar
Quasar wasn't a word prior to someone
observing the thing that was a
quasi-stellar radio Source but defining
this patch of light coming from a
distant region of space that was
observed by a telescope or seen through
a telescope imaged and put on a
photographic plate somewhere simply
saying that's a quasar does not add any
knowledge of facts to the world as Papa
would say saying something is a quasar
isn't telling us what it is
these days we have explanatory theories
about quietness these days we know that
the Quasar is something like a black
hole which is consuming whole Stars
consuming whole stars and as a
consequence of that the process which
leads to the consumption of these stars
is a an accretion disk uh the the matter
from the star that is near the black
hole is spiraling into the black hole
and this causes this happens at such a
speed that the molecules and atoms out
of which this gas is made are ripped
apart ionized and the ionization means
you've got an electric current
effectively the electric current because
these spinning rotating disk of material
which is ionized has an electric charge
creates a magnetic field moving charges
create magnetic fields and so the
magnetic field causes great Jets of
material to shoot away from the black
hole via this interesting process this
sync Neutron radiation is produced
Illuminating these big lobes of gas that
can be seen from a long way off namely a
place like the Earth many billions of
light years away as it turns out this in
part is what a quasar is but none of
that is a definition that's an
explanation we can still say